Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we will go through the configurations
covered in the lecture video.
Let’s get right into it.
First, in step 1 we will ping an external
server, 8.8.8.8 from these two PCs, as well
as check their default gateway.
I’ll do the ping from PC1 first.
PING 8.8.8.8.
Okay, the ping works.
Now let’s check PC1’s default gateway.
On a PC you can use this command, IPCONFIG,
to check the IP settings.
So, R1’s (*PC1's) default gateway address is 10.0.1.253,
which is R1.
Now let’s check on PC2.
First I’ll ping the server.
PING 8.8.8.8.
Okay, we’re getting replies.
So, what’s PC2’s default gateway?
Let’s check.
IPCONFIG.
It’s R1, so it’s the same as PC1.
Now, let me do something I didn’t do on
PC1.
I’ll do a traceroute to 8.8.8.8.
I’ve shown you this once before I think,
it’s a very useful command.
On PCs the command is ‘tracert’, but be
aware that in Cisco IOS it’s ‘traceroute’,
spelled out fully.
So, TRACERT 8.8.8.8, and you can confirm that
the first hop is 10.0.1.253, before it reaches
8.8.8.8, which is just a loopback interface
on R3, by the way.
Next up in step 2 we are told to configure
HSRP version 2 on R1 and R2.
We should make sure R1 is the active router,
raise its priority, lower R2’s priority,
and also enable preemption.
Let’s go on R1.
ENABLE.
CONF T. Remember, FHRPs like HSRP are configured
directly on the interface, G0/0 in this case.
INTERFACE G0/0.
First, let’s enable HSRP version 2.
The command is STANDBY VERSION 2.
Next I’ll configure the virtual IP.
I didn’t mention this in the lecture video,
but notice that you can configure the IP,
preemption, priority, etc without specifying
the group number.
If you do this, the router will automatically
use a group number of 0.
The STANDBY VERSION command, however, applies
to all groups, you don’t need to specify
the group number.
I like to match the group number with the
VLAN number, so I’m going to configure a
group number of 1.
I haven’t done any VLAN configuration on
the switches, so everything is in VLAN 1.
You can use whatever group number you want,
though.
First I’ll configure the virtual IP and
get HSRP actually running.
STANDBY 1 IP 10.0.1.254.
Next, the priority.
STANDBY 1 PRIORITY 200.
The default is 100.
Finally I’ll enable preemption.
STANDBY 1 PREEMPT.
Okay, that’s all for now on R1.
Now I’ll configure R2.
ENABLE.
CONF T. INTERFACE G0/0.
Okay, I’m going to leave it at HSRP version
1 for now, to show you what happens when there
is a version mismatch.
Let’s configure the priority.
STANDBY 1 PRIORITY 50.
Now the virtual IP, same as on R1.
STANDBY 1 IP 10.0.1.254.
Now I’m going to click this arrow here in
packet tracer to fast forward 30 seconds.
If I return to R2, you can see all of these
messages about a duplicate address.
That’s because both R1 and R2 think they
are the active router.
Why is that?
It’s because of the version mismatch.
Because there is a version mismatch, they
aren’t able to negotiate an active and standby,
they both claim to be the active router.
To fix this, I’ll configure version 2 here
on R2.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
Now I’ll click those arrows again.
And now I’ll check back on R2.
So, the messages have stopped.
Let’s check DO SHOW STANDBY.
Okay, state is standby.
And down here you can see that the active
router is 10.0.1.253, which is R1.
So, now that the versions match everything
seems to be working fine.
Next up, in step 3 I’ll configure the new
VIP as the default gateway of PC1 and PC2.
PC1 first.
Click on ‘config’, then set the default
gateway here.
Now I’ll do the same on PC2.
‘Config’, and set it to 10.0.1.254.
From here on PC2 I’ll try a ping again.
PING 8.8.8.8.
Okay, the ping works.
And let’s check the ARP table.
On PCs the command is ARP -A. There it is,
10.0.1.254.
Notice the HSRP version 2 virtual MAC address,
0000 0C9F F001.
Now let me show you another interesting point.
Let’s try a traceroute again.
TRACERT 8.8.8.8.
Notice that the first hop address is 10.0.1.253,
the IP address of R1’s G0/0 interface, not
the virtual IP address.
Even though the virtual IP is configured as
the default gateway, R1 replies to the traceroute
using the interface IP address instead of
the virtual IP address.
So, traceroute is a useful tool to check that
the correct gateway is being used in a situation
like this.
Next up, let’s turn off R1.
But before that, we must make sure to save
the config!
Here on R1 I’ll type END to return to privileged
exec mode, and then WRITE to save the running
config.
If you forget to save the config, it will
be lost when R1 restarts.
Now let’s turn off R1.
To do so, click on the ‘physical’ tab
here, and you can flip the power switch here.
Now I’ll click the arrows to fast forward
30 seconds so R2 can become the active router,
and now let’s try a ping from PC1.
PING 8.8.8.8.
Okay, the
ping works, so we know R2 must be acting as
the default gateway, R1 is turned off, but
let’s try a traceroute anyway to be sure.
TRACERT 8.8.8.8.
Okay, this time the first hop is displayed
as 10.0.1.252, R2’s IP address, even though
the virtual IP used as the default gateway
is .254.
Finally, let’s turn on R1 again.
Go back to R1, and flip the power switch.
I’ll press the arrows again to skip forward.
Now, without checking the CLI of R1 or R2
to see the state, I’ll try a ping and traceroute
from PC1.
We enabled preemption, so R1 should take back
the active router role.
Let’s try the ping first.
PING 8.8.8.8.
Okay, it works.
Now traceroute, let’s see if R1’s or R2’s
IP address is displayed as the first hop.
TRACERT 8.8.8.8.
It is R1’s IP address of 10.0.1.253, so
R1 has become the active router once again.
Okay, that’s all for this lab.
Next let’s take a look at a bonus lab in
Boson NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson NetSim lab preview.
As I said in the video, FHRP configuration
isn't part of the CCNA exam anymore.
So, it's actually not in NetSim for CCNA.
But I still want to show you an HSRP lab,
so I have selected a lab from the ENCOR, CCNP
ENCOR 350-401 NetSim.
So, NetSim for CCNP ENCOR.
And FHRP configuration is an exam topic on
the CCNP, and as you can see there are plenty
of labs for FHRPs in NetSim for CCNP.
Starting here, 'Configuring Hot Standby Router
Protocol', all the way down to here, 'Troubleshooting
GLBP'.
So I counted, in total there are 19 labs covering
HSRP, VRRP, and GLBP.
So, all the configuration practice you need
for FHRPs.
Okay, the lab I've selected for today is this
one, configuring hot standby router protocol.
So let's check it out.
This is the lab topology.
Pretty simple, we got four switches, access
switches, distribution switches.
And then two routers.
And we're going to configure HSRP on these
routers.
These are the commands you need to know.
The STANDBY commands we covered in the lecture,
and the ones we just saw.
The IP addresses on each device.
And the lab tasks, there are four main tasks
in this lab.
Task 1, verify basic connectivity.
Task 2, configure HSRP.
Task 3, verify HSRP configuration.
And task 4, assign HSRP priorities and preempt.
So, for this lab preview let's just do task
1 and task 2.
So first up, task 1.
It says this task involves verifying the connectivity
of the devices on the network.
Okay, so here's step 1.
Verify all non-HSRP IP addresses on each device
by using the proper SHOW command and the IP
addresses table.
Alright, so let's check.
So, the CLI of Router1 is already open.
So I will check it out.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
FastEthernet0/0, looks good.
And 0/1 looks good also.
Okay, let's check out Router2.
FastEthernet0/0 is correct, and FastEthernet0/1
is correct as well.
Now let's check out the switches.
Oh, I'm getting an update for NetSim, I will
not download that now.
Okay, ASW1, it has an IP address in VLAN1.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
And the address is correct.
How about ASW2?
The address is correct.
Okay, next the distribution switches.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
VLAN1, looks good.
FastEthernet3,4,5 look good.
And HSRP, I guess we will configure later.
Next one, DSW2.
The VLAN1 address is correct.
And FastEthernet3,4 and 5 are correct also.
Okay, last up, the two clients, the two PCs.
So, to check the IP address here let's use
IPCONFIG.
IP address 3.30, looks good.
The default gateway is 3.3, which is correct.
And I guess later we will change this to use
the HSRP address as the default gateway.
Okay, finally I'll check on Client2.
IPCONFIG.
IP address 3.30, or sorry, 3.40.
Okay, and default gateway 3.2.
Looks good.
Okay, so step 2, verify that Client1 can ping
DSW1's VLAN1 interface.
Okay, I'll go back to Client1.
172.16.3.3.
Alright, we're getting a reply so no problems
there.
And how about Client2, can it ping DSW2's
VLAN1 interface?
PING 172.16.3.2.
Okay, looks good.
And then verify that Client1 and Client2 can
ping Router1's FastEthernet0/0 interface.
Okay, PING 172.16.253.2.
Okay, looks good.
I'll do the same back on Client1.
Okay.
Router1's FastEthernet0/0 interface, oh it's
not labelled here.
Okay, well we can ping it so, it's not a problem.
Actually let me use CDP to see what's connected
here.
This is a command we'll cover later in the
course.
SHOW CDP NEIGHBORS.
Okay, so FastEthernet0/0 is the one connected
to DSW1, here.
And FastEthernet0/1 is the one connected to
DSW2, got it.
Okay, that's task 1.
We verified basic connectivity.
Task 2, configure HSRP.
So on DSW1 and DSW2, create an HSRP group
with a group number of 3 and an IP address
of 172.16.3.1.
Okay, so this is something a little different.
The distribution switches are going to be
the default gateways for the clients, for
the subnet.
So instead of configuring HSRP on the routers,
like I said earlier, we're actually going
to configure it the distribution switches,
and you can do that on Layer 3 switches.
Okay good, so this will be something a little
different.
Okay, so here on DSW1.
CONF T. And what is the interface?
It's VLAN 1, right?
DO SHOW VLAN BRIEF.
Yeah, everything's in VLAN 1.
Or, DO SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Do that once more.
Yeah, VLAN 1, okay.
So, INTERFACE VLAN 1.
STANDBY, and we're using group number 3.
So, STANDBY 3 IP 172.16.3.1.
And that's it.
Next, DSW2, same thing.
CONF T. INTERFACE VLAN 1.
STANDBY 3 IP 172.16.3.1.
Okay, next workstations and access layer switches
should use the newly configured HSRP IP address
as their default gateway.
On Client1 and Client2, configure the default
gateway to be 172.16.3.1.
Okay, so to do this we have to use a special
command for NetSim.
That is this, IPCONFIG /DG.
That is not a Cisco command, that is a command
used on PCs in NetSim.
So, IPCONFIG /DG 172.16.3.1.
Okay, and Client2.
IPCONFIG /DG 172.16.3.1.
And let me just check with IPCONFIG.
Yep, looks good.
Okay next, on ASW1 and ASW2, configure the
default gateway to be 172.16.3.1.
Okay, so this is again something I haven't
covered in the course.
So, ASW1 and ASW2 are Layer 2 switches.
However, even on Layer 2 switches they are
able to have one IP address.
Sorry about that, one IP address for management,
so you can connect to that IP address and
access the CLI of the device.
I will explain this later in the course.
But they don't have a routing table.
So, to specify the default gateway you can't
configure a default route, you have to use
this command.
IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY, and then put in the IP
address, 172.16.3.1.
Okay, and I will do the same on ASW2.
CONF T...oops, CONF T. IPCONFIG, nope, that
is the PCs.
IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY 172.16.3.1.
There it is.
Okay, so next we would go on to verify our HSRP
configuration and do some more advanced configuration
like priorities and preemption.
But we'll end it here.
Now, just out of curiosity I want to grade
the lab and see if we did the configurations
correctly.
It won't say that we completed the entire
lab correctly because haven't finished it
yet, but let's see how we did.
So click on 'grade lab' here.
And as expected, 'you missed one or more commands
in the lab'.
That's okay, we didn't finish it yet.
So Client1 and Client2, the configuration
is correct.
So that means we configured the default gateway
correctly.
ASW1 and ASW2, same.
The configurations are correct.
So that means our...here, IP DEFAULT-GATEWAY
command was correct.
DSW1 and DSW2, we are missing commands.
Yeah, priority and preemption.
However, the STANDBY 3 IP command is correct,
so that means we did that step correctly.
Okay, so that's a quick look at Boson NetSim.
Not for CCNA this time, but for CCNP.
So if you want to get a copy of Boson NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button
under the video.
Thank you to Tshepiso, Justin, Loki, TheGunguy,
Nil, Alex, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Magrathea,
Apogee, Wasseem, Marko, Florian, Daming, Venkatesh,
Kone, Joshua, Jhilmar, Samil, Ed, Value, John,
Funnydart, Scott, Hassan, Gerrard, Joyce,
Marek, Velvijaykum, C Mohd, Johan, Mark, Yousif,
Sidi, Boson Software, Charlesetta, Devin,
Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
One of you is still displaying as Channel
failed to load, if this is you please let
me know and I’ll see if YouTube can fix
it.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, September
22nd 2020, if you signed up recently and your
name isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll
be in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.